^#^ Variable Lists

A common technique in previous versions of Stata was to define a global containing a list of variables to be used later in the document. For example, you might see something like this at the top of a Do file:

```
global predictors x1 x2 x3 x4
```

then further down the document something like

```
regress y $predictors
logit z $predictors
```

In Stata 16, Stata has formalized this concept with the addition of the `vl` command (**v**ariable **l**ist). It works similarly to the use of globals: lists of variables are defined, then later reference via the `$name` syntax. However, using `vl` has the benefits of improved organization, customizations unique to variable lists, error checking, and overall convenience.

^#^^#^ Initialization of Variable Lists

To begin using variable lists, `vl set` must be run.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
sysuse auto
vl set
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

This produces a surprisingly large amount of output. When you initialize the use of variable lists, Stata will automatically create four variable lists, called the "System variable lists". Every *numeric* variable in the current data set is automatically placed into one of these four lists:

- `vlcategorical`: Variables which Stata thinks are categorical. These generally have to be non-negative, integer valued variables with less than 10 unique values.
- `vlcontinuous`: Variables which Stata thinks are continuous. These generally are variables which have negative values, have non-integer values, or are non-negative integers with more than 100 unique values.
- `vluncertain`: Variables which Stata is unsure whether they are continuous or categorical. These generally are non-negative integer valued variables with between 10 and 100 unique values.
- `vlother`: Any numeric variables that aren't really useful - either all missing or constant variables.

There is a potential fifth system variable list, `vldummy`, which is created when option `dummy` is passed. Unsurprisingly, this will take variables containing only values 0 and 1 out of `vlcategorical` and into this list.

The "Notes" given below the output are generic; they appear regardless of how well Stata was able to categorize the variables. They can be suppressed with the `nonotes` option to `vl set`^[My guess is that `nonotes` will become the default in a version or 2, once users become used to `vl`.].

The two thresholds given above, 10 and 100, can be adjusted by the `categorical` and `uncertain` options. For example,

```
vl set, categorical(20) uncertain(50)
```

Running `vl set` on an already `vl`-set data set will result in an error, unless the `clear` option is given, which will re-generate the lists.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl set, dummy nonotes
vl set, dummy nonotes clear
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

In the above, we changed our minds and wanted to include the `vldummy` list, but since we'd already `vl`-set, we had the `clear` the existing set.

^#^^#^ Viewing lists

When initializing the variable lists, we're treated to a nice table of all defined lists. We can replay it via

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl dir
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

To see the actual contents of the variable lists, we'll need to sue `vl list`.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

This output produces one row for each variable *in each variable list it is in*. We haven't used this yet, but variables can be in multiple lists.

We can list only specific lists:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list vlcategorical
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

or specific variables

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list (turn weight)
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

If "turn" was in multiple variable lists, each would appear as a row in this output.

There's a bit of odd notation which can be used to sort the output by variable name, which makes it easier to identify variables which appear in multiple lists.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list (_all), sort
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

The `(_all)` tells Stata to report on all variables, and sorting (when you specify at least one variable) orders by variable name rather than variable list name.

This will also list any numeric variables which are not found in **any** list.

^#^^#^^#^ Moving variables in system lists

After initializing the variable lists, if you plan on using the system lists, you may need to move variables around (e.g. classifying the `vluncertain` variables into their proper lists). This can be done via `vl move` which has the syntax

```
vl move (<variables to move>) <destination list>
```

For example, all the variables in `vluncertain` are actually continuous:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list vluncertain
vl move (price mpg trunk weight length turn displacement) vlcontinuous
vl dir
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Alternatively, since we're moving all variables in `vluncertain`, we can see our first use of the variable list!

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl set, dummy nonotes clear
vl move ($vluncertain) vlcontinuous
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Note that variable lists are essentially just global macros so can be referred to via `\$name`. Note, however, that the `\$` is only used when we want to actually use the variable list as a macro - in this case, we wanted to expand `vluncertain` into it's list of variables. When we're referring to a variable list in the `vl` commands, we *do not* use the `\$`.

^#^^#^ User Variable Lists

In addition to the System variable lists, you can define your own User variables lists, which I imagine will be used far more often. These are easy to create with `vl create`:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl create mylist1 = (weight mpg)
vl create mylist2 = (weight length trunk)
vl dir, user
vl list, user
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Note the addition of the `user` option to `vl list` and `vl dir` to show only User variable lists and suppress the System variable lists. We can also demonstrate the odd sorting syntax here:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list (_all), sort user
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

You can refer to variable lists in all the usual shortcut ways:

```
vl create mylist = (x1-x100 z*)
```

We can add labels to variable lists:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl label mylist1 "Related to gas consumption"
vl label mylist2 "Related to size"
vl dir, user
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

^#^^#^^#^ Modifying User Variable Lists

First, note that with User Variable Lists, the `vl move` command **does not work**. It only works with system variable lists.

We can create new user variable lists which build off old lists with `vl create`. To add a new variable:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl create mylist3 = mylist2 + (gear_ratio)
vl list, user
vl create mylist4 = mylist2 - (turn)
vl list, user
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Instead of adding (or removing) single variables at a time, we can instead add or remove lists. Keeping with the comment above, you do *not* use `\$` here to refer to the list.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl create mylist5 = mylist2 - mylist1
vl list mylist5
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

However, if we want to simply modify an existing list, a better approach would be the `vl modify` command. `vl create` and `vl modify` are similar to `generate` and `replace`; the former creates a new variable list while the later changes an existing variable list, but the syntax right of the `=` is the same.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl modify mylist3 = mylist3 + (headroom)
vl modify mylist3 = mylist3 - (weight)
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

^#^^#^ Dropping variable list

Variable lists can be dropped via `vl drop`

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl dir, user
vl drop mylist4 mylist5
vl dir, user
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

System lists cannot be dropped; if you run `vl drop vlcontinuous` it just removes all the variables from it.

^#^^#^ Using Variable Lists

To be explicit, we can use variable lists in any command which would take the variables in that list. For example,

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
describe $mylist3
describe $vlcategorical
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

We can also use them in a modeling setting.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
regress mpg $mylist3
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

However, we'll run into an issue here - how to specify categorical variables or interactions? The `vl substitute` command creates "factor-variable lists" that can include factor variable indicators (`i.`), continuous variable indicators (`c.`), and interactions (`#` or `##`). (The name "factor-variable list" is slightly disingenuous; you could create a "factor-variable list" that includes no actual factors, for example, if you wanted to interact two continuous variables.)

Creating a factor-varible list via `vl substitute` can be done by specifying variables or variable lists.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl substitute sublist1 = mpg mylist3
display "$sublist1"
vl dir
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Note the use of `display "\$listname"` instead of `vl list`. Factor-variable lists are not just lists of vairables, they also can include the features above, so must be displayed. Note that in the `vl dir`, "sublist1" has no number of variables listed, making it stand apart.

We can make this more interesting by actually including continuous/factor indicatores and/or interactions.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl substitute sublist2 = c.mylist1##i.vldummy
display "$sublist2"
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Note the need to specify that mylist1 is continuous (with `c.`). It follows the normal convention that Stata assumes predictors in a model are continuous by default, unless they're invloved in an interaction, in which case it assumes they are factors by default.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
regress price $sublist2
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

^#^^#^^#^ Updating factor-variable Lists

Factor-variable lists cannot be directly modified.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
display "$sublist1"
vl modify sublist1 = sublist1 - mpg
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

However, if you create a factor-variable list using only other variable lists, if those lists get updated, so does the factor-variable list!

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl create continuous = (turn trunk)
vl create categorical = (rep78 foreign)
vl substitute predictors = c.continuous##i.categorical
display "$predictors"
vl modify continuous = continuous - (trunk)
quiet vl rebuild
display "$predictors"
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

Note the call to `vl rebuild`. Among other things, it will re-generate the factor-variable lists. (It produces a `vl dir` output without an option to suppress it, hence the use of [`quiet`](https://errickson.net/stata1/programming.html#quieting-the-output).)

^#^^#^ Stored Statistics

You may have noticed that certain characteristics of the variable are reported.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list mylist3
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

This reports some characteristics of the variables (integer, whether it's non-negative) and the number of unique values. We can also see some other statistics:

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl list mylist3, min max obs
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

This is similar to [`codebook`](https://www.stata.com/manuals/dcodebook.pdf) except faster; these characteristics are saved at the time the variable list is created or modified and not updated automatically. If the data changes, this does *not* get updated.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
drop if weight < 3000
summarize weight
vl list (weight), min max obs
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

To re-generate these stored statistics, we call `vl set` again, with the `update` option.

~~~~
<<dd_do>>
vl set, update
vl list (weight), min max obs
<</dd_do>>
~~~~

When the `update` option is passed, variable lists are not affected, only stored statistics are updated.
